nnv inmonocrron ’

the ground that the St. Gatian text and that os the Garland o
Howth are together.

The first is St. Lulre xv. 25 to xvi. 15, which has 40 variants
from the Clementine, of which 20 (or 50 per cent) are traced to
Old Latin sources in the proportionsola10; d93 d83 e 53
f8;ff11;rn1;q6;r4,andothers.

The next· section where 7¹2 is extant is xvii. 7 to xix. 11. Here
Hereiord has 143 variants, oi which 59 (or 41 per cent.) are Old
Latin, comprising b with 295 pand r 28 3 ff und r 19 3 u and

16, and d 11. ,
’ Tltroughout the whole of our text whether collated with the
Clementine or with the Wordswortlrian Vulgate tlte proportion
oi Old Latin readings among the variations is about 40 per cent.
We can irom these facts appreciate Dr. Gwyn¹s remark that the
memories of the Celtic scribes were saturated with the familiar
Old Latin text and their religious lile bound up with it.

(ii) Tlre‘ Vulgata base’ Throry ns applied to thr Celtic Trrtsotlrr'r
tlara rtur of rte Book of Drrrroro.

Just as a number of scholars haue assumed that the date of
ains. where it is not known is of the eighth century, on the
principle ‘Omne ignotum pro-saeculo octayo’‚ to quote the
phrase ol the Dean oi Lichfield‚ so it has been too oiten repeated
that the Celtic MSS. have a Vulgare base. My own view is
entirely in support ol the position 'oi Mt. Hoskier and Dom
Chapman:

‘The point to be emphaslsed is that the Irish text as a whole,

irrespective of date, isan Old Latin tert revised to the Vulgum, 'rand
quite unlike Amiatinus, which would seem always to haye been a

Vulgate.'¹ ,

Dom Chapman describes it ² as a ‘European' text, corrected
considerably by the revision ol St. Jerome, and all existing MSS.
oi it haye been still further revised, some more, some less. The
Celtic text is an Old Latin text corrected to the Vulgare, not
a Vulgate text corrupted by the Old Latin.³ The lrish Gospel
text is fundamentally an Old Latin text vulgarizet*

¹ Hoslrier, Concerm'ng tle Genesisof Ἰ Tlre Early Histary of tle Vulgare
tle Versibus ostie Now Τ attentent, ii. Gosprls, p. 172.
280. ’ Α ³Ibid.,pr178. ‘Ibidup 179.

 

