lxvi INTRODUCTION

is the witness and keeper ol Holy thit, so the interpreters of the
text are the Holy Fathers. It is they who teach the spiritual
meaning of the text itself‚ of what St. Paul would call ‘ the letter'.
It is their exposition oi ‘ the letter' which gives it ‘spirit ’, with-
out which the bare text is ol no avail. ihave not seen theproblem
stated in this simple and commonpiace way, but it appears to be
the gist oi the argument. Ἴ ,

St. Bede loved and reverenced the F athers, but their authority
was more binding on Alcuiu, in whose school at Tours scholasti·
cisrn seems to have had its beginning.¹

Llaudaff and Larymna

After the submission oi Llandaif to the supremacy oi Canter-v
bury it would naturally follow that the text of Canterbury would
become the text oi Llandaff, that is to say that whatever text
was in use at Llandafl would be replaced by Archbishop Lan-
franc's scholastic revision in conformiry with the text ol the
Universal Church. To quote Dr. Glunz :-

¹ ‘While the early types irad been thus significant to a high degree,

a point was reached iu the twelfth century with reference to which it
became meaningless to speak oi au Irish, Auglo-Saxon, Spanish, or
Alcuinian type. There is only oue Catholic text, a text which is
symboliealof auniform system of religion, philosophy, andtheology.’¹

It is this fact which makes Haddan’s remark about the scribe
ol lL being acquainted with the Old Latin meaningless to me,
ior the Catlrolic text which he copied would have incorporated
a large number of Old Latin variants.

Lanlranc had already consecrated orte-consecrated Hereward
Bishop oi Llandaff in A,D.10712: and the English Primate’s
revision, based more on theology than on textuai criticism, would
naturally make its appearance at Laudant

From the Salisbury Bibles, whose readings agree in a remark·
able manner (which the constant recurrente of W indicates in the
critical apparatus) with those ol lL, we learn that the text of
Lanfranc remained unaltered for more than a century, and this
would cover the second portion ol the text of lL, which is prior,

1 V. E, p. 149. ’ ³ ‘Et quia Scripturas scriptorum vitio

ΜΛ). 1071 Lanlraucus Herewardnm erant nimium corruptae . . . secundum
Landaviae Episcopum Cantharie eonse- orthodoxam fidem studuit corrigere*
cravit' (Cr E. D, i. 293). (aava Laufranci (hligue, cl. 55)).

 

