rau cauare eosraus . xv

workf whereas the Welsh were driven into a corner and most of

their works destroyed.

Between Wales and lreland there was constant intercourse, as
Miss Cecile O'Rahilly has shown in her roland aad Wares, their
Historical aad Literary Relations. Wales probably gave Patrick
to lreland from some place near the Sevem Sea, and the lrish
saints ilocked into Wales ‘to learrr the way of God more per-
fectly¹. ‘ADavide episcopo et Gilia et a Doeo Britonibus missam .
acceperunt ⁵, says the catalogue of the irish saints in reference to
the second order (544-98) receivinga new liturgy of the Mass
from these British saints. ·

It is said thatSt. Davids was placed where it is owing to its
proximity to lreland. ln their journeys to Gaul there are
references to the lrish saints and scholare crossing ‘ the two scas ’,
and this alternative route to the Continent was via St. David’s.
If in later times all flecked to lreland, including ecclesiastice
from St. Davids, to the famous school ol St. Finnian at Clonard,
it must be remembered that St. Finnian himselfhad been trained
under St. David and other Welsh saints in Wales, ancl whatever V
was said about the glories of Clonard in the lrish MSS. was also
said of Llantwit Major in the Welsh MSS. '

There are numerous records of the intercourse between Llan-
carfan and lrelaud, where the Welsh monastery had daughter
foundations. There are also references to the exchange of llllSS.
between the religious houses of Wales and lreland. Our know-
ledge is not sufficient to tell whether lreland got its Celtic text
and its beautiful Insular script from Wales, or whether Wales
received it, as it is set down in the Llandaff=Lichfield and the
Hereford Gospels¹ from lreland.

ff The fact that these British MSS. bear the characteristics of
irisb penmanship and illumination, together with the Celtic text,
only proves that these characteristics were the common property
of Britain and lreland alike, because the culture of the two
countries at that time was practically the same; for the shores of Ἴ

v the lrish Sea formed a‘ culture pool ¹, as Dr. For of the National Ἴ
lllluseum os Wales has shown in his personatu of Britain. The
script of TeilozChad and Hereford is no more lrish than Welsh,
as can be seen by comparing the letters with those of the Gurmarc
stone at St. Davids‚ the Enniaun cross at Margam, the pillar oi
Samson at Llantwit Major, together with other inscriptions both

 

