THE CELTIC GOSPELS xvii

to be read in the service of the church, as it contains no Euse-
biancanonsArnnroniansections,ortitles,andthereare,ofcowrse‚
no chapters or verses, nor were the folios numbered. In a vagae
way some capitals and stops make some sort os division here and ,
there, but the MS. has no devices to facilitate oral reading. It
was nreant to he used, and was used, as a rnost sacred object of
veneration, which, in a barbarous age, wild men¹ like the king
who threw stones at the door os the Cathedral could take their
oaths upon, as it contained the holy lawot the unseeu God whorn
they invoked to witness their nrost solemn acts.

cristes boc.

The Heresord Gospels were also used lor recording solemn
acts and deeds³ and, as lawyers lrnow, such deeds are recorded in
the past tense, the act or deed being rnade otherwise than on
paper¹ and recorded as evidence that it had been made. ⁴

In these Gospels, at the end, iu an Anglo-Saxon hand quite
uulilre the British hand of the Gospels, is a record concerning the
right to certain land, which concludes with the words:

‘and thureill rad tha to sancte aethelberhtes nrynstre be ealles thaes
folces leafe and gewithesse and let settan on ane Cristes boc '‚

which Professor Lindsay gives in modern English as ‘and
Thurcill rode then to St: Ethelbert's Minster with all the folk's
leave and witness and had (let) it entered (set) on a Christ's
book.'1 This record belongs to the episcopate of Athelstan at
Herelord (lory-56) and the reign of Cnut (1017—35). There are
also Lichfield records in the Llandaff=Lichfield Codex made
alter it had reached what was to be its Mercian horne for
a thousand years.

From Lluuduff to Lr'clrfield.

Glamorgan was continually exposed to raids from northern ·
neighbours on the one side and the English on the other. The
Vita Sancti Iltatc' gives an account os a raid ori Llantwit Major
by King Eadgar, bu't it was not the only instance of an Angla-
Saxon attack on South waes. lt is probable that the Llandaff
Codex uvas carried away during one of these ralds, which need
not os necessity have heen on the Cathedral itself.

1 Early Welst Scrzspt, p. 41.
b

 

