THE CELTIC GOSPELS xxv

oi St. Gall. Its Greek side rs known as Δ and rts sLat' tm count er·
part as lts chrel rn eres tlies' rnt he fae that he scrrbe has .
given some noo alternatives or double readings' rn the Latin·
translation ol the Greek m St. Matt hew alone This seat ture of
the Latin is also to be found rnt the St t. Gatian ursos lTours.
I haue not been able to secure the text ol Codex Sangallensis,
but have used the vocabularies supplied by Dr. Harris in his
sttudy ol the text. He is ol opinion that the Latin side, both
here and rn Codex Bezae,¹ rs not an accommodati uon to it s conju·
gat·‚teGreek but that the Greek¹ rs accommodated to the Lat trn in
many places. Where the Latin differsf rotnt the best Old Latin
texts it often cont ains a reading which exeeeds thern all' rn
antiquity. Hrs theory tha these readingsrepresent ttalos tversion
of greater antiquity than our present texts is attractive, and
would cover many ol the peculial* readings of the Celtic texts
which cannot be traced to any extant Old Latin MS.

ι An surreptorem Text.
ln collating st. lllark oi Teilo = Chad and St. Luke oi the

Hereford Gospels with the Munich Gospels (Codex Monacensis or
q) the number ol supports from qis striking. This text is claimed
as Italian with Codex Brixianus by Dr. Hort‚ hut Professor
Souter's conclusion that it presupposes a different Greek text

from that which underlies the other Old Latin MSS, whether
African or European, is more conuincing.

Some Rure Τ extr.

Before we proceed to consider the Italian text, or the Vulgare
text of St. Jerome's correction, something must he said ol some
y other Old Latin MSS. whose texts Ι haue not been able to obtain
or to examine at first hand, and haue had to rely on reports from
Wordsworth and While, Hoskier‚ Bianchini, and other writers.
First, there are the readings supplied by Blanchini in his Evau-
getarum Quadruplex in Migne's Potrologr'rr (Larum), vol. xii.
codex corbeiensis 1 (ffrl was taken from France to St. Peters-
burg. lt contains St. Matthew only. I have made use ol its
readings in those places where ff² is deficient.
Codex Vhrdoboneusts (i) is at Vienna. My citations from it
are taken from Bianchini’s reporta.
Codex Reddr‘gerarrrrr (l) is at Breslau.

 

