x INTRODUCTION

MS. known as Codex Usserianns 1, or a„ at Trinity College,
Dnblin. The text of the Hereford Gospels belongs to the Celtic
recension or family, and is far removed from that of the Anglo·
Roman Church as represented by the Book of Lindisfarne. ,

But we must return to the Llandafszichfield Gospels. This
MS. is most commonly known as ‘The Book of st. Chad'
because it has been the property of the great Mercian cathedral, q
whose patron saint is Chaa, from the time of Wynsige, Bishop of
, Lichfield who signed his name ‘Wynsige presul¹ on the first
extant page of theMS. But, as it belonged to Llandaff Cathedral
for a long time before that, and bears upon it the record that it
was given to God and St. Teilo, patron-saint of Llandaff, and
contains withIn it many records of persons connected with
Llandaff Cathedral, it may also be called St. Teilo's Gospels.1
Moreover, it is actually called Teilo⁷s Gospel (Book) ln the
attestations: ’

‘ De clericis vero Nobis episcopus teiliav saturnguid sacerdos teiliav’

and of others to the record (in the margin where St. Luke’s
pertrait appears) by Sulgen the scholasticus. The transaction
referred to is that of a manumission of slaves by some members
of Sulgen's family, and in the usual anathema is the renrinder
that the cleed is faithfully recorded in Teilo's Gospel:

‘sit maledictus ado et a teiliav in ct aeuangelio scrip ÷

‘May he be cnrsed of God and of Teilo in whose Gospel
(Book) it is written.³
This was the ancient form of effecting that solemnity which the
law still requires for certain transactions. The date of the dead
= is before 840, for Bishop Nobis is said to have been translated to
St. Davids at or about that time. ,

lt cannot be termed Tlaa Book of St. Trito, as that description
has all along belonged to the twelfth-century Liber Landa-
vensis, which is called in Welsh Llyfr Τ vilo or ‘Teilo's Book '.
Professor Lindsay is of opinion that the Book of St. Chad should
be called the St. Teilo’s Gospels.²

lIt has beenclescribed byWordsworrb pp, 458-61 (Cantabr. 1899), qni hunc
and Whire in theirllhrannr Testamentum librum “Euangelia S. Tetiau'’ (Lauda—
Lata'ne as ‘Lichfetdensia olim Lauda· vensis) potius quam “Euangelus Cerrd·
vensis (L) ‚fret forsan in Cambria scri· dae '¹ (Lichfeldensis) nuncupat, p. 707)
ptus est’, followed by their reference, 2 ‘But there are manyWelshentries,
‘Vide H. bradshaw, Collertevl Papam, as well as Latin entries containing Welsh

 

