xnv -cwcnonvcnou Ἰ ’

that saint himself according to Dr. Lawlor,1 though the colophon

Ι has been read as covering the whole, ‘Nomen autem scriptoris =

mulling dicitur’. Much the same thingI believe to have hap-

a pened in the case of the one Gospel transcribed in twelve days
(a reasonable time) by St. Columba.

The story as to the ownership of a copy made from another

book, and the decision based upon the principle ‘To every =
cow her calf' is well known to most olus. Dr. Lawlor has
shown thatin the second Life of Finnian of Maghbile it is said
that amongst the gifts presented to him at Rome by Pope
Pelagius were ‘Euangelia quoque quae terra illa nondum plene ¹
susceperat ¹. The irish had, of course, fully received the Old ι
Latin text of the Gospels long before this, so it seems reasonable '.
to conclude that what he brought from Rome wasa copy of the
Vulgate Gospels. Columba, who had the reputation of being an .
industrious scribe, was so fascinated with it that he secretly
made a copy for his own use (¹ scripsi mihimet 'l in ahurry (in
twelve days). This incident justifies Dr. Lawlor's conclusion:

‘The new translation was welcomed no doubt, by scholars, but it is
unlikely that it was used for the purpose of edification by pr‘eachers¹
or in the ordinary services of the chorch.'²

Durrow was the saint's chief foundation in lreland. Further,
the cumdach or satchel for the MS. was made by Flann‚ King of
Ireland (ob. 916), with an inscription addressed to Colarrnd crille.

The text of the Book ovaurrow is aVulgate copied from the
text which Columba made for himself, into which, either then or
later, Old Latin and lrish readings found their way. It was
practically a new text for Ireland.

Professor Lindsay's statement that the second entry is an invo-
canonos this ‘Columba scriptor’ is open to question, as ‘DNS
TECUM SIT ’ is hardly unat would have been said to a departed
saint but quite appropriate ro the render of this scribe's work.

Hoskier's observations on the nature of Dr. Abbott¹s collations
are given under the brief descriptiones νῇ below. He also speaks
of his skeleton collation oi the Book of Durrow. Ι had come to
the same conclusion before reading any of Hoskier's works.

Unfortunately Ι know of no continuous portion of the text ol

¹ Tre Callianassa Calcaria, p. 399λ ² Tlre Bitrrcal Tuxl in T iadal's Visfow.
Proc. nnn. Crxxiii (pp. 241-443). Proc. xxxvi C (ἧι-375).

 

