nu ' turnouucrrou

Codex Colbertt'nns (c) is at Paris, but was written in Languedoc,
where the use of this very late copy of the Oid Latin text
lingered on tilithe twelfth century when the MS. was written.
Professor Bnrkitt quotes a specimen oi the orthography from
Mc. xii. 32:

Un'÷ ds tr neali' pt eu.
This stands for ‘Unus est Deus et non est alius praeter eum’.
There is much the same orthography in the tweifth—century
St. Matthew attached to the Book of Llandaff.

Codex Coibertinus is supposed to contain a: farge clement oi
‘African' readings, The MS. isan illustrationes the fact that ,
age of MS. and age of text are two different things. Ι have
tried to obtain or to see the text hut haue failed. My very
meagre reports from this MS. are from several works where
some of its readings are quoted.

Tire ltaliae Text.

‚ The Codex Brixianus (f) stands in apecuiiar position oi
aMS. of the Italian type of text which is the European type
purified and refined and made more cultured. The question is
whether this ‘ Itala¹ is not St. Jerome’s Vulgate itself,as was be-
iieved by Bentley ancl is maintained hy Professor Burkitt in Tlte
Old Latin and tte I talu (T extr und S tudier, vol. iv, No. 3) and sup-
ported by Professor Souter.1 Wordsworth and White, on the
other hand, regard it as an Oid Latin text which St. Jerome
took as his base ior his Vulgate. Since 90 per cent. of it is
Vulgate the question is how to account for the remaining ro per ’
cent. oi the text.

St, Augustine mentions the ‘Itala’ as the best translation. it
is called by him Itala interpretatio, and is preferred to thc others
because it not oniy stichs more cioscly to the words (ί verborum
tenacior 'j but also shows greater insight into their meaning.
Buricitt maintaius that the Vulgate was Italian to St. Augustius,
who was living in Africa. Souter says s was written in the sixth
century and represents the Latin side of a bilingual MS. which
had Gothic on the other, that it was made from an Old Latin

1‘f (saec. vi) (mutilus) (Breseini. Is potius iuter codices Vnigatae Latinae
codex non ueteris Latinae uersiouis, sed adnumerandus esse uidetur’ (rt'oumn

pars Latina codicis Gothico-Latini, et Testamentum GraaecnSouter).

 

