lxii INTRODUCTION

the MSS. brought from Rome to Canterbury hy St. Augustino

and his followers. This X-O type was the kind oi text srom

which St. Bede made his quotations. It represents the text used

by St. Gregory the Great at Rome—not wholly vulgate but

‘ mixed, on his own showing. ’

‘I shall expound the new translation 3 but whenever itis necessary

for the justification of my exposition, Ishall adopt the old translation

in between the new one as testimony 3 ior the Apostolic See, which

Ι, by the will oi God, arn holding, has both translations, and so shall
also the work of my study he supported by both?1

Though St. Gregoty wrote these words in connexion with his
Maisolia, or Exposition of the Book os Job, there can be no
doubt that they represent his practice in some of his other works.
Dom Chapman has shown this very clearly in the lists of Old
Latin variants which he extracted from St. Gregoty¹s iorty

humilies, prefixed to the Gospels on which he comments.2
Dr. Glunz is ol the ophion that variants in the irish text had
come to lteland from the non-Hieronymic ingrediente inthe
Italian mixed text of the Vulgate.³ Bothe uses ‘Itish' as a

generic term to include Scottish and Welsh, whereI should use
Celtic 3 and on the other· hand he uses‘Britain’ to include Iteland;
ior, though he places L and Q undet Dae aescae T ypra, he agrees
with Wotdswotth-White (p. 706) in assigning Q to Scodand,
‘L aus Wales ', and E to the continente His contention that
the lrish MSS. diverge at a disputed point, so that one par·
represents the Hieronymic and the other the non-Hieronymo, wil
be conceded by those who have stndied the text⁵

Tae Theodolpaiaa decorior.

But Alcuin's recension was not all, for Theodulplr, Bishopo
Otleans, did the same with the Spanish MSS„ which contai
a text neat akin to the Celtic text, as is shown by the hequem
recurrente oi the symbols CT in the critical apparatus of m
’ work. This recension was almost contemporaneous with the wor .
oi Alexin, and is chiefly represented hy the MS. known as Θ,

1 V.E.‚ p. ῖς hligne, lxxv. 516. Vulgata einsrihrte¹ (aa, p. 85).

1 Early Histay iffilre Vulgata Gaspels, ⁴ B. B„ pp. 14, aa.
pp. roy-8. ⁵ ‘Sehr oit gelren die lriselren Hssa

³ ‘Andere nichthieronymianische Be· einer strittigeu Stelle auseinander, so dat
= standteile waren sehon iu dem italisehen ein Tell die hieronymianische, der ander
Vulgatamr'schtext enthalten‚ der nach die nichthieronymianische Variante ver
Irland kam nnd dort iiberhaupt exst die tritt' (B.B., p. 82).

 

