xiv rurxouucrrou

We must be careiul to distinguish between similarity in iliu-
mination and illustration on the one hand and the character of
the Latin text oi the Gospels on the other. The handwriting, it
is true, is very much allice, but no one has suggested thatthe
Lindisiarne Gospels were written iu lreland. The style of semi·
uncial script was in being lor several centones, and the North·
Eritish codex was written c. 700. Some time before, in 667, the
irish monks retired to lona owing to their refusal to adopt the
Roman customs and accept the Roman discipline. Lindissarne
then became Italo-Saxon, though the Irish schoolssof writing and
illumination still continued, hut the texts which they copied were
not the same. Dom Clrapman tells us that the text of the
Ἰ Lindisfarne Gospels is substantially the same as that of the

. Codex Amiatinus‚ which is the farthest removed from that of

the Celtic texts.l The Lindisfame Gospels contain a Vuigate
text of the very first rank. With only 62 of Teilo=Chad’s 1‚920
variations from the Vulgate text, ofSt. Matthew aione, inWords·
· worth’s edition, is the Lindisfarne text found to agree. The
Llandaff and Lichfield Gospels belong to the Celtic Church;
Lindisfarne‚ on the other hand, to a famous mission which had

ψ lately been Celtic but at the time the great codex was pro·

duced had passed to the Roman discipline, and in company with
the neighbouring abbeys ot Wearmouth and jarrow produced
the italien and best type of the Vulgate text.

Very few of the early British MSS. have survived that pro·
cess which began with the persecutions of the third century,
when, according to Gildas, piles of MSS. of the scriptures were
bumed. There are several references in Welsh literature down
to the time of Queen Eiizabeth to one Scolan who burned the

books of walese How comes it that so many irish MSS. of
the Gospels have survived while most of the British have
perished? The truth is that the irish missionaries were found
all over the continent of Europe where they left remains of their

¹ ‘We are therefore not surprised to llosgi llyfrao'r Cymro.
mo unt rue splendid round rana or , <H2tGwr²didmor-188·)
Lindisfarue has preserved forus substan· Lli'sfflfl Cyfflll’ a'u lIOsTUdd

tially the same text of the Gospels that 1¹¹ ΝΠ gw yn aetham ar ΨΜ

the not less beautiful Italian haud oi {3335ss ffiffffilffffin'

Jorrow set down in A’ (Early History -Guto'r Glyn,

of tic lhilgwa nomeu, p. 9).

Ε Α dausonScolau,gythraulgzm, See also Myrcidin Wyllt's verses ou

Yscolan in the Mys, Arria, p. 104.

 

