ivn ² rnrnonncrron

It was the cnstom to heat the bounds of territory devoted to
the Cathedral with great solernrrity. The petty hings carried the
Boolr oi the Gospels on their hachs in the procession. Such
lands were far from Llandaff sometimes, es was Llanarth in
Monrnonthshire near the English horder.

‘King lddon, son of llnyr Gwent‚ for the enchange of nn eternnl
country sacrificed one of nis mansione, viz. Lan Carth,1 and all its
- territory . . . and the king going round the whole territory and carry-
ing the Gospel on his beel, . . perambulated the whole. , , ,¹²

It might well have been on some such occasion that the Mercians
made a reid and carried off the Gospels with the rest oi the
lunder.
p The British Mnsennr MS. 36279 contains papers iorwarded to
the renisers of the Bible of 1881, and amongst thern, ati. 119, is
a printed paper, by Bishop Abraham, which contains nothing
fresh, but its closing words are os interest. He writes of the
second Lord's Prayer‚ at the end of St. Mari< in the Lichfield
Codex ι

‘and it ends with a device that seems to stand both for ‘anralo’ and
for cmxl, the year when probably it carne into the hands of Bishop

Kinsy‚ ie. nn. 940)³

1 i.e. Llannrth. the side following the m erased. The lic
² Μ, p. 358. normal. So far, this gives the appearance
’ ³Theaoftlreinsularseriptloohslike oicmrl. Ofwhatwassnpposedtohethe
ano witha cjoined on to it. Now in concluding o of ‘amalo’‚ we hore an
this ‘a malo ’‚ which is written as one elongation to correspond with that of the
word ‘amaroz the o part of the a is opert of thenon theother side, but only
elongated nt the side to three-fifths of en the top and the side nent tc the l now
incl]¹ while the c pnrt of the Celtic a is remain, the elongarion not beingjoinedy
perfect. This letter then loolrs more like and the bottorn of the elongatedoercsed.
- acthcn an a. The rw that follows is Theletterinitserasedfonn wonldhave
normal. The appearance of the second no significationen whatnns arnalo now
a in ‘amalo’ is that of a perfect x, for reads cmxl or 940.

the o part of the α has had the middle of

 

