THE CELTIC GOSPELS . xiii

, writing which the scribe failed to decipher completely when he
carne to the attestations.
The ⁴ Surexit’ entry is as follows:

‘Surexit tutbule fili(ns) linit hagener tutri dierchinr tir tetih haioid
ilau elcu fili(us) gelbig haluidt iuguret anigucant pel arntanndi ho
diued diprotant gener tutri o guir inguodant ir degion guragun tage
rodesit elcu guetig eq(us) tres uaehe tres uache nouidligi na ir ni be
cais igridu dimediehat guetig hit did braut gretiat guetig nis nrinn
tutbutc hai cenetl I ois oisou εἶδ’

This entry may be translated:
‘Tutvulch the son of Llywydandsonin-law of Tudri arose to claim
the land of Telych which was in the hand of Eleu the son of Gelhig
and the tribe of tudguoret. They eontend long about' it. At last
they dispossess the son-in-law of Tudri of (bis) right. The good·
men beseech one another (saying) “Let us make peacel' Eleu
afterwards gave a horse, three cous¹ three newly-calved cows only
that there be no hotred between thern from his possession afterwards
titt the day of doom. Tutvulch and his kinsfofk wilt not hereafter
clairn any title for ever and ever.’²
Sir john Morris Jones was of opinion that this is a copy of
a document of Teilo's time and written in Wefsh because the
parties to the agreement probably woufd not have understood
Latin (ant. cta, p. 279). Professor Lindsay does not exclude the
possibility of the MS. itself being referred to Teito’s time.

The attestations to the document are:

‘†Teliau T(estis) Gurgint T(estis) Cinbitinn T(estis) Sp's T(estis)

Tota familia Teliani, De Laicis Nunrin M(ap) Aidan T(estis) Signou

bf(ap)Iacoquestis)BerthutisT(estis)CindaT(estis)q(ui)c(nm)q(ue)

custodierit benedictus) er(it). qui) (un)q(ue)frangeritmaledietfus)

er(it)...'
I ¹ The reference to Teilo's date (he died c. 580, according to Baring-
Gould and Fisher in their Lines of tte Banna Satan, p. 227, or
in 604, according to Ussher) brings us to the question as to the
priority ofthe Lfandaff Gospels as compared with those ofLindis-
farne, and also to the comparison of their texts.

¹ ‘This deest, “something islaeking '’, lauds given to the church of Llandaff aud
“continued below''‚ is ausivered by the other matters wih be found in Rhys and
obelus-mark before reliana Professor Evans's Boedas Llon Dav, pp. xttii-
Lindsay¹ Early Welrlr Script, p. 46. xiviii3 Seebohrn’s Trttrt Syriam fn

² Further records in the book, concern· Waler, pp. 178-86 3 Bradshaw¹s Conana

ing manumissione of serfs, officers of the Papus, ppt 281-5, 452-88.
cathedrul, hod-rents, and boundaries of

 

