vi PREFACE

Nevertheless I have to thank the authorities ol the British
Museurn, the Bodleian, Lamheth Palace, Christchurch‚ Canter-
bury, and Boulognesur-Mer for the privilege of working in their
respective libraries during my summer holidaysr

To my eolleagues on the Libraries Committee ol the City ot
Cardift, to hlr. Farr, the librarian, and his assistant llllr. Morgan,
my thanks are due lor the loan ol sorne rare works which l was
unable to purchase.

The Dean and Chapter of Heresord very kindly provided me
with a photostat copy of St. Luke ol the Herelord Gospels,
and allowed me to collate St. Matthew and St. Mark lrom their
treasure in the chained library. For this Ι am greatly'indehted
to Chancellor Lilley.

To hir. Jenkin James‚ Secretary to the Press Board and
to the Couneil of the University ol Wales, l orve the favour ol
putting me in touch with the Printer to the University of
Oxlord.

It would not be courteous to praise the work ol the Printer and
his staff of academie readers and correctors, but I should like to
say that the passage of my book tlnough the press has been very
pleasant and agreeable, with the advantage of the Printer's
knowledge, experiente, and advice.

Professor Grufsydd, the Cardiff representative of the Press
Board of the University of Wales, has saved nre from some
errors in the translation ol Old Welsh reeords. Ἴ

The Dean ol Lichfield and my friend the Rev. David Mathew
Lutra, have also revised some of the procl-sheets.

Ι am glad on grounds ol sentiment and respect that my work
is associated in some measure with the University of Wales in
addition to being produced by the Oxiord University Press.

The Index is the work of my friend Miss Amy G. Foster, Bu„
to whom Llandaff is indebted sor the Calendar of its muniments.

Last ot all, 1 am in duty bound to take this opportunity ol
assuring his Grace,.the Lord Arehbishop of Wales, that nis'
encouragement has been a source ¹of comfort and strength in the
furtheranee of a task which has been to me a labour ol great love.

sn Mnnmu’s Vrcnnnou L. J. H.-J.
Cnnumr.
tim Ducunaan, 1933,

 

