THE CELTIC GOSPELS xlv

the Book ol Durrow apart from a few verses, wherewith to test
’ ¹this matter. In the publication Tae Narrabat Mssofrreland ,¹
St. Luke i. 1=5 fs given in f,ull and here Dr, Abbot tt has omrt 'tted
ιιοιιιιειιειι ’for adsecuto', ‘omnibns’ for‘ omnia', ‘'Theofile y

for Theonino-²,‘tudae⁷f0r‘1udaeae’Westwoodogivesthe ’

firts pagoe of St. Mark downt to ‘camelli (ιι, 6). ln these few η
verses Dr Abbott orms ‘’est f er scriptum 'profeta’ for¹ Ἰ
‘propheta ‚.‘ Iohannis for ‘ Iohannes ‚ ‘babtizans' for baptizans,
‘babtismum’ for ‘baptismum ', ‘remisionem' for ‘remissionem ¹,
ι omnes' for‘omnis'‚ ‘Iudeae' for⁴ludaeae '‚ ‘ hyerosolomitae' for
‘ Hierosolymitae'‚' ‘Iohannis ‘ for‘ lohannes ³, ‘pylis'for ‘ pilis ¹,
¹ ¹ and ‘camelli’ for ‘cameli’. ln fact he gives no report for the
first seven verses of St. lllark.

Ριιιιιιιιι, which has the Vulgate apparatus with a Vulgate text,
-. has also a fair sprinkling of Old Latin and insular readings and
orthography‚ more in number than Dr. Abbott's attenuated
collation would lead us to expect. Ιι reads like a MS. which
wasa Vulgate from the beginning, like Codex Amiatinus and
therefore it stands apart from the rest in the argument as to the
origin and character of the Insulas text. Ἴ

Tae Book of K alls.

This MS. has >been called the rnost beautiful hook in the world,
but here we are only concerned with its text. lt is of a later
date than Teilo = Chad, and the peculiarity about its text is
that it is full of doublets, sometimes saying the same thing ln a
different way.

tThe scribe must have taken his text from ruore than one MS„
and shows his method of working in chapter xxiii of St. Luke,
where in verse ι 5 he writes: ‘ln alio sic remisi eum ad uos narn
remi risi uos ad illum'. Here the gloss has been placed before the

· ttex tln ιιιι, vi. 16, the Vulgt crate reads ‘exterminant enirn ,
faciessuas ¹-tbu tmost of the Insular MSS give ‘demoliuntur'¹

Here, however, Kellsjoins them and reads‘ demuliunt tur ext er-
minant ιιι the puzzlfng passage of the Lat' tm text s ιιιιοιιι the
two sons who were asked to do theia ther s will, Kells' Joins the
'two readings‘ primus ’and nouissimus'— —dlcunt primus et
nouissirnus’.

Ile Natio nul MSSuof Irel'and gives an illustration of the ,

 

“ text of ιιι, xxvii. ιιι in the Book of Kells. On comparing it

