lx INTRODUCTION

lL it would haue strengthened the already powerful argument of
his thesis, but not ewen the name of Llandaff appears in his
book. This, however, cannot be said of his earlier srudy Britan-
πίθῃ ninid Bibulum (referred to here as B. B.), published in Germany
(Leipzig, 1930), which did noi reach rne till this work was in type
rulth the exception of this added chapter.

Tne Alcaininn Recensn'on.

111n.n.813‚822,and 829 the Frankish Episcopale resolwed
Μ ‘ the bishops shall institute schools, in which shall he learned the
literary disciplines and the documents of Holy Scriptores?1

That there was an Episcopal or Capitular school at Llandaff
at the time when the Llandaff = Lichheld Gospels were there is
plain sronr the references to Sulgen, who is termed the Scholasticns
in the St. Teilo's Gospels.² The wording of the demands of ihe
Frankish hishops‚ compared with those oi Bishops Bledri and
Josepn at Llandaff‚ is so much alihe as to Indicate'a general
movemeni for the stndy of Holy Scripture, common not only to
the Franks bui also eo cheWelsh, though later in lirne, and would
show thar the isolation ol the Church in Wales, even before ihc
Norrnan Colonen, was nol as great as n is generally supposed
in have been, lor already some of the bishops of Llandaff had
been consecrated hythe Archhishop ol Canterbwy, including
Bledri and Joseph, and it is from the records concerning these
two hishops than we hear of the progress of this monemeni in
ene Diocese ol Llandaff.

It is recorded in the Gwentian Brut that in Al). 1023 Bledri
Bishop of Teilo (Llandall) died ; thar he was the hesi scholar in
the land of Wales and on that account he was called Bledri the
Wise‚ for he loved knowledge so rnuch that he obliged every

, priest lo uphold instruction from literary worhs in his church,

that every one might know his duty to God and men³

The same Brut under Aah. 1030 stares that in that year
Joseph, Teilo’s Bishop, ordered that no worh or occupation
should take place on Sundays and holyndayS, and ohllged the

¹ ΚΕ. 72, Ddoelh, a chysral y carai wybodau sal

lSee p. xii. dodes ar yr offeiriaid gynual nddys

² ‘Oed ctist 1023, husarw.. . . Bledri llysrnu llen boh un yn ei eglwys‚ mal
Escob Teilaw ysgolhnig pennas gwlnd gwypai bnwb a ddylynt parth Duw
Gynuu, achaws hynny y gelwiri ef Bledri dynion.' CIED„ i. 128.

 

