THE CELTIC GOSPELS lxv

Codex Gauianus.

As early as the seventh century the text of Codex Catienusl
appears on the Continent, written by anexpatriatedCeltic scholar.
This Codex, especIally in its interlinear alternatives, has a text
which is closely ahin to that of L and her. ·

The Bedunia Gospcls.

Then again the Cornish Gospels of St. ΡεῒιόοεΒοάηιίη2 have
much the sanae tale to tell. According to Dr. Glunz³ they were
written about 940, ‘ copied by an insular scribe trained on the
Continent, from an original which came from a monastic school
such as Laon, Reims, or Paris '.

His description of its script as ‘an insular hand using Carolin-
gian minuscules’ would seem to reconcile the apparently contra·
dictory estimates of Berger· and Bradshaw on page l. This
MS. at the British Museum (Ado. MS. 9381) contains a quantity
of Celtic variants and a large percentage of Alcuinian readings.
The mixture of the two types evolved in the ninth century—the
infusion of the Celtic clement into the continental text, was
further increased by the presence oi colonies of Celtic scholars at
Laon and Auxerre, under the patronage of Charles the Bald. ,

solih Scottis E rigam.

Chief among them was John the Scot, the most profound
philosopher of the Middle Ages, who carne¹ from freland in the
middle of the ninth century and ‘adopted the strange readings
of Irish MSS. often derived from the Greek or the Old Latin,
whenever they seemed to him preferable to the continental
readings, because of the facility with which they lent themselves
to his particular methods of interpretation* Ἰ

Half the story of the influence of the Celtic on the continental
text must be lest witold, lest the reader be wearied.

The growth of Scholastic philosophy and its effect on the text =
ofthe Catholfc Church must be very briefly considered. The
Scholastic text was formed on the principle that, as the Church
erkl'rirt, interpoliert, leichter eiugangrieh ² See p. xlix.
gemacht durchstilistische Umlindemngen, ³ V. E.. ppA av, 69.

Zuiugen erhlttrender Zus'atze usw.’ (Brt- ⁴ Μ, p. 109. See also Britmtuien

latinitat ποιά Eideltext, p. 86). und Biduum, pp. 68 to 88.
¹ See p. lli.

 

Ε

