rv' rusaooverrorr

now more fashionable than true to ascribe the unknown to the
‘cighth century, as the Dean of Liehfreld has pointed out.l

In my opinion, we must await the conclusione of the philolo-
gists, on the grounds set forth by Dr. thite‚2 before the question
of the provenance of the MS. can be determined. Meanwhile Dr.
Seebohm in his T νίόαί S ystern in Wales, pp. 181-4, seems to have
proved that ittarne to Llandaff from the monastery of St. Cingual
(Rhosilly) in Gower, for the following reasons.

The ‘Surexit ’ entry (pp. xii, xiii above) connects the family of
Eleu son of Gellii with the family ol Tutbulc son of Liuit in the
dispute relating to the land of Telih.

In the Book of Llan Dalv (p. 144) there is a record confirming
the ownership by Llandaff of Cella Cyngualan in Gower'1-
‘agrum idest podum Cyngualan ². On p. 239 there is a reference
’ to the violation of the refuge ‘inmonasterio sancti cinguali ’. ln
the houndaries mentioned here there is the description ‘ad
agrurn cinguali' arrd ‘iuxta telich’ (p. 240). ln the next grant
(pp. ano-a) there is Lann Liuit and the words ‘filius tutbulch’‚
and in our MS. Tutbulc is said to he the son of Liuit.

Professor Gruffydd tells me that the differenee in spelling,
‘cingal’ of the‘ Surexit’ entry and ‘ Cyngual’ or ‘Cingual’ of the
Book of Llan Datv, is uo indication of different persons, and that
there is nothing in Old Welsh against both the forms being used
for the same name.

l do not think Dr. Scrivener is correct when he writes³ ‘The
scribe seems anchanged throughout, only on p. 132, l. 2, six
words are hy another hand, as if to test its competency: The
reference he gives is to the line illi pilutus raon aradis qawaa
aazia (Mt. xxvii. 13). I can see nothing whatever to indicate
a difference in the hand here. But there appears to be a differ-
enee on p. 138, l. a with seven words: aorem dte quaeest post

1 ‘Look down arry list of Latin MSS. early Latin MSS. may strengthen the
of the New Testament aud notice the supposition thatapparentlycarelessspell·
wearisome lteratlon of ‘¹ saec. viii¹'‚ at· jug may be really due not to accident hut
tached to these Gospels. 'fhe standard to different modes of pronunciation cur-
maxim appears to be “Omne ignotum rent iu the regions to which the MS. or
pro—saeculooctavol'. Butthiscloesnot its ancestors belonged: and rhus the
Δ help. It might beanotunprotitahle rask orthography of a MS. may throv great
for some competent critic earelullyto test light on the origin of the tert which it
these monolouous dates' (Tlre Story of preseuts' (ΟΜ. Τ. Νο. iii, p. xv).

St. carah Gospels¹ p. 19). ³ Codro S. Ceudduo Latinus, vii.

² ‘A fuller comparative examinatior of

 

