nv '' ruruonucuou

Dotted capitals are very frequent. The reader has to be warned
that tire signs of punctuation do not mean the same as they do
in modern English. Ἴ

If Scrivener had any first-hand acquaintance with the Celtic
MSS. he would not have written:

‘Afashion of which we renrember no like instance elsewhere, is to
begin a new section or paragraph with a new line, and then, to save
the uniform appearance of the page, to fill up the vacant portion of

’ the preceding line by continuing into it a few words of the new see-
tion‚ dividing thern off by lines above it⁷1

indeed, the practice is fairly common, ior it is found in the Books
of Kells, Dimma, lllulling, and Mac Durnan. The break between
the paragraphs is marked by a symbol in the Book of Kells
which the irish scribes called ‘head under the wing'‚'or ‘turn
under the path ¹.

The very common feature of cla for irin the Llandaff= Lichfield
text is what first directed my attention to the Hereford Gospels
, when Ι saw in Eishop Westcott’s article on the Vulgate in Smith's
Dictionary astla Balla the illustration rulth the words ‘ et lux in
tenebris luceret tenebrae earn non conpraechenderunt ¹. Thecla
here showed me that L and Hereiord belonged to the same
family Ι have myself heard a West Wales clergyman say
‘yoly Spirit’. The aa or χ ln these cases is not pronounced as
tire guttural in the Welsh ‘chwi ³, nor as ca in ‘chain ¹, ‘church ¹,
or· ‘cherry '‚ bnt more like ca in ‘Reichstag¹ or in Welslr ‘gwich'
for‘squeak'.2 “ ¹ ,

The very common feature of c for qa, and pa for c, is found
hundreds of years before in the Latin oi Italy and Africa,
Cardinal Wiseman³ gives instances from arnobius, Plautus,
Terence, and Tertullian.

We should understand the scribe’s work better if we knew
more of the spoken Latin of the time and how it was pronounced.
Many of the orthographica] features are not mistakes on the part
of the scribe but the usage of the times, as can be seen from th
Glamorgan monuments of the period. On the Margam cross w·

² Op. cin, p. vii. Royal Family: ‘Endue them with tlr
²'The Reer. S. McArthnr,B.D.,tells yoly Spirit: enrich them with th
me he has heard some West Wales yeavenly grace: prosper rhem with al
students at samaraeus College,Llan- yappinessff
dail, say, in the Anglican prayer for the ³ Errays, p. apa.

 

