THE CELTIC GOSPELS ' lxiii

Ihave accounted ior the similarity oi the Celtic and Spanish q
texts, following Dom Cbapmnn and others, on the ground oi their
common derivation irorn Lerina· Dr. 'Glunz goes further and
says not only that the Celtic text had penetrated the Spanish
MSS„ but that this was due to irish monasticism in Spain.1

The quest oi the ideal, vizi the original text oi the Vulgata as
St. Jerome left it, and the chain oi tradition from it, seem to
have corne to an end ior a long time with the Alcuinian recem
sion. The recension oi Tbeodulph shows that there were
private or semi-private revisions, in addition to such apublic
revision as that oi Alcuin. That there were such in our own
country seems probable. Just as trees in a wood are marked
beiorehand ior falling, so μ and L were marked 3 by the system oi

dots, in preparation ior the corrector¹s alterations to be affected ,

The corrections would generally be made to accord with St·
jerome's text.

lnprocecdingiromthetranscriptionoftheTeilotext‚repeated
severaltirnesover‚tothecollationoitheHereiordGospelswithit,
Ι found a remarkable agreement of the variants, so much so that
l always expected the same variant, hut here and there the pro-
gress was arrested by finding the Vulgate reading. l presumed
from this experience that the Herelord Codex was more ot a ι
Vulgata MS. than the Book oi St. Chad. Again, on looking
at the text ol the Book oi Deer, kindly shown me by the Dean
of Lichfield ancl having in rnind many of L’s variants, Ἰ ex·
claimed ‘Oh this is a Vulgatel’ though it was a Celtic MS.
This would leave the impresston that some revision had been
made in the CeltIc MSS„ some time between Teilo of the first
hand and the writingoi the Herelord Gospels, The date ol the
hlcuinian and Theodulphian revisions, that is c. 800, or a little
later, would fia in with this conjecture. lt may well be that our
Teilo :2 Chad, which does not seem to have been put to any
liturgical use, was succeeded at ,Llandaii by a Book oi the
Gospels avith a revised text, in accord with what the dots would
indicate in our MS„ to be replaced again in due course by
the Continental text brought in by the Norman Conquetors.

¹ ¹ Die Spureniriscben llbuchswesens typus¹ was sich inLesatten der spanischen

inSpautanvernsaehrendortvernischung Hss. zeigt' (B.B., p. 38).
desspanischen mit dem irischen Vulgata-

 

