curetur 11
THE OLD LATIN VERSIONS

lT is to Rome we should naturally look for the earliest Latin
version of th'e Greek Gospels. Such a version would be forth· .
coming in response to a need that had to be met, but apparently
that need was not felt so much at Rome as elsewhere.

Educated Romans were abilingual people. St. Paul wrote his
Epistle to the Romans in Greek, and St. Clementof Rome wrote
to the Corinthians in the same tongue. irenaeus in Gaul wrote
chiefly in Greek, and Marcus Aurelius sets forth his meditations
likewise in Greek. With rare exceptions the early Popes in
Rome all bear Greek names and wrote in Greek. Moreover,
even to-day we find more Greek than is generally supposed in
the Roman liturgy. especially in the services for Holy Week.
For evidence of the earliest attempts to render the Greek Gospels
in the Latin tongue we must look to another part of the
Empire. ⁴

Tite African Vastan.

At the close ol· the second and the beginning or the third
century we find a strong Church nte in North Africa, and appa-
rently the need oi a Latin version was fele there more than at the
heart of the Empire. We cannot say with certainty when indi-
vidual attempts at translating the Gospels first began. Accord-
ing to St. Angustine it was a common practice in the first ages
of the saith sor those who possessed the Greek text to try their
hands at rendering it into Latin ε

·‘Ut enim cuiuis primis fidei temporibus in manus uenit Codex
Graecus, et aliquantulum facultatis sibi utriusque linguae habere
uidebatur, ausus est interpretari?

What became ot such attempts we do not know, except that some
one or other of them must have corne to the front before Ter-
tullian's tirne (c. al). 200).

Before the third century closes there is much more to be
learnt, lor there has come dorvn to us the Bobbio MS. called k,
which contains a text with which quotations from the Gospels as
used by St. Cyprian largely agree. This MS. can well be classed
among the ‘ codices Afros¹ of which St. Augustine speaks. It

 

