THE CELTIC GOSPELS xxiii

was 'probably written in Africa in the fourth century, and found

its way to the Celtic monastery ofBobbio in north Italy7 perhaps
‚through Spain. Unfortunately it contains only lille. viii. 8—xvi. 8
audititi. 1—xv. 36, while much, even of these portions,is missing.
This most ancient and interesting MS. has been published by the
Oxford University Press under the editorship of distinguished
scholars.

θ.

Fortunately, however, we possess another ‘African ³, or rather
modified African, codex known as the Codex Palatinus or c. This
again is not complete, as it lacks a considerable proportion of
the text. The Africanisms, as they are called, or vulgar and
rustic Latin, have been considerably modified in this MS. through
contact with the European Latin. Itis quite possible that the
text of this MS. is an ancestor to the text of Teilo=Chad, because
they both have exactly the same reading in Mt. xxii. 25:

‘erant autem autem apud nos septem fratres '.

Of course the duplication of autern may be a mere coincidence.
Cardinal Wisernan was oi opinion that there existed but one
version os the Old Latin Gospers, and that was the African
'Version According to his ,view this proceeded northwards to
ltaly and was the parent of the European Versions‚ which he
maintained were but revised and refined African. But the Euro·
pean text seems to be so different from the African that it is very
difficult to believe it is its child, though it is quite possible that
in the course of ages the African text was considerably Euro-
peanized, as we know was the case with the Codex Palatinus.

Tre European Τ ext. =

Itis impossible to say when the European text arose, as there
seems to beno evidence before the appearance of the Gamelsoj
Venelli· (known as a), said to have been written by Eusebius,
bishop of that see, who died in Ab. 371¹ As the MS. has the
letter a assigned to it, perhaps it may be weh to state that tire
Old Latin texts are known by the small letters ol the alphabet‚
and, generally speaking, the Vulgate and mixed textsby
capitals. codex vercellensis hasbeen much worn by the kisscs of
pilgrims, and was written before St. Jerome¹s Vulgata appeared.
Its text is printed in vol. xii os Migne’s patrologia (Latina).

 

