PART IV

conetur xr
FROll THE BRITISH TO THE CATHOLIC TEXT

St. Mottlreeo of tlre Book of Lloodoff

OUR study would not be complete without some reference to
the story ol the Latin text in general during the four centuries
or so tlrat elapsed between the production of the Gospels of St.
Teilo and the Vulgare text ol St. Mattbew at the beginning ol
the troo Loodooeosir.

To assign this later text to any definite· date is beyond my
power, remembering that date of script and date of text do not
always mean the same thing. Att that I can do is to give the
opinion of Haddan, and quote Dr. Gwenogwryn Evans’s conclu·
sion on palaeographic grounds. Hoddan writes:

‘A Latin version of St. Matthew's Gospel is prefixed to the original
MS. ot the Liber Londooeasr's (at Owston, co. Yorlr) which is almost
wholly torpore, but retains a few faint traces ol the Old Latio: eg.
in iii. 7 (flotano interlined)¹ v. 15 (supro), vii. 23 (antrat interlined),
vii. ²7 (oto), xxiv. 20 (orn. r'o). Itis of no. 1100 or thereaboutsssl

Elsewhere Haddan wrote :—

‘It begins with the Gospel of St. Matthew‚ in Latin, 47 pp. (the
48th is blank) 3 Vulgate text, bnt witha traee here and there that the
transcribet was familiar with the Old Latin (eg. the words otiatura
and oriones are interlined respectively at c. iii. v. 7, and evii. v. 2 gl?2

These statements require some qualification, for Dr. Evans in
his Introduction to the Boot of Llan Ddo (xviii) writes :-

‘This copy of the Gospel was written earlier than any part oi the
Book of Llan Dav, but the earlier chapters being either lost or
injured have been replaced in a hand of about 1400·'

l copied in purple inlr the whole ol St. lllatthew from the photo-
stat laesimile of the Book of Lloodoff into a boolr, between the
lines of my transcript of Teilo = chad, in black inlr, so that the
two texts could be read line for line. This book is in the

¹ Coorrcr'lr arrd Ecrl. Dorronerrtr, vol. i, ² Forbes, retraho ot tlte late Α. W.
p. 624. Heroon, p. ²4³·

 

