n INTRODUCTION

MS. known as Codex 'Usserianns I, or a„ at Trinity College,
Dnblln. The text oi the Hereford Gospels belongs to the Celtic
reeension or family, and is far removed from that of the Anglo-
Roman Chnrch as represented hythe Book of Lindisfarne. ,

But we must return to the LlandaffzLichfield Gospels. This
MS. is most commonly known as ‘The Book of St. Chad’
because it has been the property of the great llllercian cathedral,
whose patron saint is Chad, from the time of Wynsige, Bishop of
Lichfield, inho signed his name ‘Wynsige presnl¹ on the first
extant page ol tneMS. But, as it belonged to Llandaff Cathedral
fora long time before that, and bears upon it the record that it
was given to God and Str Teilo‚ patron-saint of Llandaff‚ and
contains within it many recorda of persons connected with
Llandaff Cathedral it may also bc called St. Teilo's Gospele.l
Moreover, it is actually called Teilo's Gospel (Book) in the
attestations:

‘De clericis vero Nobis episcopus teiliav saturnguid sacerdos teiliav'
and of others to the record (in the margin where St. Lnke’s
portrait appears) by Snlgen the scholasticus, The transaction
referred to is that of a manumission of slaves by some nrenrbers
of Sulgen's family, and in the nsnal anathema is the renrinder

that the deed is faithfnlly recorded in Teilo’s Gospel:
‘sit maledictas ado et a teiliav in cs aenangelio scrip ÷

‘May he be cnrsed of God and of Teilo in whose Gospel
(Book) it ls written.'
This was the ancient form of effecting that solemnity which the
law still requires for certain transactions. The date of the deed
is before 840, for Bishop Nobis is said to have been translated to
St. Davids at or about that time. ς

lt cannot be termed Tae aaa of St. Tella, as that description,
has all along belonged to the twelftlr-century Liber Lenda-
wensis, which is called in Vllelsh [aar Tale or ‘Teilo¹s Book ³.
Professor Lindsay is of opinion that the Book of St. Chad shonld
be called the St. Teilo’s Gospels.2

¹ lt has been described bytvordsworth pp. 458-61 (Cantaba. 1899), qni hane
and Wbite in their rlbrtrrw T eslanrrnlnm librnm “Euangelia S. Telian'’ (Lando-
Latine as ‘Lichleldensisl olim Landa- rensis) potius qnam “ErrangeliaS, Cerd-
wensis (L) ...et forsan in Cambria seri· ἀπ’) (lichfeldensis) nuncupat, p. 707!
plns est', followed hy their reference, ² ‘Bnt there are many Welshentries,
‘Vide H. Bradshaw, Colleclrd Poprrs, as well as Latin entries containing Welsh

 

