xxxviii INTRQDUCTION

Gregory'tass attemen tthat the Roman Chuich accept ted both the
Old Lat· trn and the Vulgate' rs borne ont by his own prtac ice in
mingling thet two clement ts. There can, however, be no doubt
that the influence and penetration of the Vulgate was greater in
the Italo-Saxon missions of the north of England than in th
Churches 'of Wales and Irehnd, where the older texts had ,
firmer footing, and where we cannot help believing they ha·
texts of an Old Latin character in addition to the type that ha
survived in the mutilated pages oi Primate Ussher‘s Codexr
They adopted the readings of* the Vulgate more freely than it
spellings, so that they became common in an Old Latin garh

Α . This is especially so with regard to the oldest MS. of the Vul

gare now known as Σ, so ably edited hy Professor Turner‚ fro ,
he lrrsh cunda ronoS Gall.

According to M. Berger the historiari of the Vulgata, ther
appear to have heen certain periods vhenrhere was, so to speak
a fresh Vulgare ‘ drive ’, just as there was a period when it wa·
practically excluded, The commencernent of the fifth centur
was such a period, when Britain was in active relation with th
south of Europe. But fifty years laten when the invasions o
the Saxons and others had closed the way to literary intercours
with the countries of the southa period of restraint set in, rr

μ . which the Insular churches developed their independent literar

culture. The British isles, like Spain at alater period, rernaine
closed countrics to the outer world for a long time and deve
loped Biblical texts oi their own, eut off as they were from Lati
difluence, Britain by her·- pagan invaders and Spain by the Ara
domination 3 and the old traditions of religious independenc
became accentuated by the invasions of her eneruies. Thus Spai
and Britain developed types of text which had much in commo

⁶ as they hadso Bishop Frere informs me, in liturgy as well.

Before the year 547 the Vulgate had penetrated dcepl

’ into Britain, as we can gather from the Biblical texts usedb

’ Gildas except in certain books of the Old Testament. Many ι
the Vulgare corrections vvere incorporated into the Celtic MSS
bnt the precise amount oi correction needed to turn a Celt'
mixed text into a Vulgate Ι have never been ableto ascertain.

 

