ennvrun'x

ORTHOGRAPHICAL PECULIARITIES

AS it has been my endeavour to note the peculiarities in the
orthography-as Ι followed the text no list need be given here ’ ’
Our Britislr texts differ very little from those ol Irelend in this
respect. The lrish dotted y only occurs in four or five different
words in Teilo = Chad. Ι have never seen the Hereford ‘ Phi-
letus' for ⁴ Pilatus’ in any other MS. Scrivener gives a short list
oi the peculiarities of Teilo=chad ; so does Professor Lindsrry in
his Early Welst Scrr'pt, both ior the Llnndaif end the Hereford
Gospels. The spelling is much the some in both, and differs very
. little in all the MSS. of the British=lrish school. Not all the
variations in spelling ere peculim to this semotior many of
them occur in the Old Latin Gospels. MSJr has always f forplr,
with no exceptione: it hes also a lor e, o for o, ae for e, b for p,
b sor rr, e for oe, e sor i, tfor a, r' inserted, n lor m, o lorety lor c,
sforr,rf0rd,1rs0rb,uf0r·0‚yfort. inb again there is con-
stant interclrange of b and p, such as ‘ puplicanus ’3 b for rr, ‘obes ¹;
rand cli, ‘recha’3 e and d, ‘talantum'3 e and oe, ‘graegis';
i und ii, ¹ hii' ; l 'and lt, ¹ sallietur '·, l and r, ‘ fructibus ’3 rand rr,
‘diabulus ⁵. Indeed, any one acquainted with the variations of
the Old Latin MSS. will not be surprised at anything he finds in
the lnsular texts. Ἰ
’ The indiscriminate use of b and ritulis very frequent in the Old
Latin MSS. The Herelord St. Luke gives ‘Elizafeth' in one line ,
and ‘ Elizabeth ' in the next. ‘Philetus' und ‘Pilatus ¹ are almost
together.

The diphthong re in the form ol en e with a loop below to
the left is frequent.

ln both our MSS, as in the Spanish texts ofC and T‚³ ’
aspirates are used where they are not wanted, and omitted where
we should expect to find thern. Words are strung together, such
es ‘Amendieouohis’ or separated like ‘super sub stantialem'.

'¹ ‘The Welsh', savs Sir John Rhys, Romans, who, us 'early as the time or
in his [αἵτινες on Welslr Plrilology (p. Augustus, sometimes pronounced the ’
199), ‘seem 'to have only imitated the ospimte and sometimes not.¹

 

