charran nr
ST. JEROME AND HIS VULGATE

THE reader will probably have formed the opinion already that
there existed a great variety of Latin texts with regional differ-
ences sufficient to enable them to be classed according to their
provenance. But variety in readings and renderings did not end
there. No two MSS. even of the same provenance agreed abso·
lutely, so that Jerome¹s words ‘tot sunt exemplaria pene quot
codices ¹, ‘there are almost as many forms of text as copies '‚
or ‘every MS. gives a new type of text ¹, appears to be not far
from the truth.

The sacred text had suffered much corruption, and it seemed
to Damasus the Pope that the time had come to revise it; more-
, ’ over, he had at hand a scholar well qualified for the task. The ’

Pope chose his secretary Eusebius Sofronins Hieronymus, who ,

had been one of the most able pupils ol the grammarian Donatus,
and was, as Professor Turnergputs it, beyond most other men
‘utriusque linguae peritus ¹. He reproached himself ior being
more of a Ciceronian than a Christian, and relates that when he
was ill with a lever he dreamt that he wasjudged hy Christ, who
replied to his plea that he wasa Christian ¹ Mentiris, Ciceronianus

es, non Christianus: ubi enirn thesaurus tuus, ibi et cor tuum!
We know how St. Jerome conceived of his task from his open
letter to Pope Damasus when he sent him the first-fruito ol his
work in nt). 383:

- ‘Thou compellest me to make anew work of an old: after so many
copies of the scriptores have been dispersed throughout the world, 1
am now to occupy the seat ol the arbiter, as it were, and seeing they
disagroe, to decide which of them accords with the truth of the
Greek: a pious task,truly, yeta perilous presumption, to pass judge-
ment on othere, and onesell to be judged by all.

St. lerome complained that the texts had been badly rendered
by incompetent translators (‘a vitiosis interpretibus male edita ¹),
made worse instead ol better by the presumption of unskilful ¹
correctors, and added to or altered by sleepy scribes. We do not
know what Greek MSS. he used other than that they were old,
as he tells us. Where the Latin texts were at variance he chose

 

