THE CELTIC GOSPELS lix

Museum, in chargeof the Keeper, the Rev. Ε, W. Williamson,
ΕΒΑ, Canon oi Llandaff and Warden oi St. liiichael’s Collega.

Down to xii. 23 the text of Itis written in a much later hand
than that oi the rest of the Gospel¹ and ends with ‘dice' at xii.
23, while the earlier hand begins with ‘bauti Moreover i. 1 to
xii. 23 is corrected by a later scribe by way of interlineas readings
which cease when the earlier hand is reached, and which seem to η
indicate that they were made before the sheets were inserted in
the MS,

The text on the whole is very similar to that of W or the
Codex Willelmi de Hales, which was formerly at Salisbnry bnt
is now in the British Museum. lt was written in 1254 from an
earlier Salisbury Bible, and ii, is like it in being closely related
to the early printed Vulgates oi the sixteenth century.

The variants oi the Gospel text of lL‚in so far as they support
the variants ol L, appear in my critical apparatus under the
symbol lL which represents the Book of Llarrdaff in particular,
because L can be read sor Lichfield (Codex Lichieldensis), or ’
Llandaff (Codex Landavensis), or, as Wordsworth aad White
call it ⁶ Codex Lichseldrarr's olim Larrdavcrrsis' (xii). lL differs
from VO in some 525 places, though in 180 ol these it agrees
with the Clementiae Vulgate aa against vo. Thus it has 345
variants which belong neither to the Clementiae nor to the ,
Oxiord Vulgata and these are all we can consider in the collation
given in Appendix A below

As l believe Haddan's words about there being traces here
and there of the scribe being acquainted with the Old Latin con-

· vey a wrong impressbn, something must be said concerning the
history of the text which lL represents¹

With „the exception ol this Chapter, my work was in type
before Dr. Glunz's Hr'stwy of tte Vulgata rh Eaglaad frunt
Altaria to Rogat Bacca1 appeared. His book is a library in itsels,
as he draws upon at least 128 MSS. to illustrate his theme, but
the Boea ‹p‘Llarzdaff is not among them.

This erudite study has helped me to trace the course of events
which led to so much oi the Celtic text being merged in that
Os the Catholic Cburch; to place the results of the collation oi
lL, made some years besore, in their proper setting; and to
deduce what is implied by the variants¹ tf Dr. Glunz had read

¹ Cambridge University Press, 1953, and referred to here as V.E.

 

