CHAPTER IX

SOlllE CONTINENTAL MSS. OF THE CELTIC
FAMILY

TEXTS ol the British = lrish recension found ahorne in many Ἰ
places of the Continent of Europe, such as Echternach Lenda-
wennoeinBrittany,Tours,St.Gall,thrzburgfflobbioandBerne.

’ They were either taken from the British lsles by foreigners who
came hither for stndy, or by Celtic wanderers who leit their land
for new homes abroad, or copied lrom Celtic texts in the new .
settlcnrents ’

It is not unknown tor Celts to be more patriotic abroad than
at home, and the tendency os harking back to Old Latin or
mixed British-Irish readings in the margins or between the lines
oi the Gospels is very plain in the Gospels ol St. Gatian and
Echteniach especially, much more so than with those written on
British or lrish soil. v

There are three MSS. in particular which must be mentioned,
those known by the symbols'os E or rant, t? or ept, and gat.

T lte E gerion Gospels‚ now in the British hluseurn, are perhaps
’ better known on the Continent by the symbol nrm, which stands
ior hrains rnorrastrrr'wro near Ten-s, than byWordsworth’s symbol,
which is E. Dr. White says it is written in an Irish hand and
presents an Irish type of text, bnt it is much mntilated, especially
insertare.

rw Ettrewnct Gospels are so called because the Codex was

v formerly at Echternach in Luxemburg, but it is now at Paris.

³ ll. Beyger classes it with the lrish family, but its text is peculiar
and complicated. The MS. either belonged to St. Willibrord or

ζ was copied from a MS. brought by him from England. From a

,ἒ note therein it appears that the parent text was corrected in

Α-Β. 558 by a Codex which camelrom the Library oi Engipius and

7 was reputed to have belonged to Stlerome. Dom Chapman, who

ᾗ, has devoted pains to this MS, places its text oi the first hand

in brackets withA and Y in the Northumbrian family. lt'is
placed by him—again in brackets (this time with an asterisk

J* outside the bracket)—'amongst the Irish family platonio ,

which also he places the marginal readings ol the MS. The

 

