xxiv INTRODUCTION

Closely related to this text is the Coden Veronensis, or natent
to which the general run of European texts is nearer related
than to any other. The MS. has been assigned by its editor, ΜΓ.
Buchanan‚ to the fifth century.

Tne Gallicano Tent.

ln the Codex Coobeo'ensn's ( ff or ff„ a MS. which llllr. Buchanan

dates from the fourth century) we have a Gallican type of text
ol great antiquity.
η Unlortunatelythe Codex Clnnonnontonns (loos the Gospels-not
to be confused with ln of the Epistles which is the palimpsest of
Flenry)‚ now at the Vatican, and the Codon sangermanensis (gl)
exist in their Old Latin iorrn in St. Matthew only, the rest being
mixed or Vulgare.

As the British Isles probably received their Christianity
lrorn Gaul, it is but natural that we should find the Old Latin
readings in the Celtic Gospels so larg'ely derived fron ff, lo, nond gl.
St. Matthew‚ ruore than the other Gospels, retained much ol the
Old Latin formos text, and yet, where the Old Latin readings are
rnost prevalent, there, if we relied on the citations of Wordsworth
and erite, we should come to the conclusion that they were
most rare. When, however, the Oxford editors reached St. Luke
they wrote: ‘Lectiones etiam ex interpretationibus ueteribus
saepius quarn antea citauimus ’.1

In the Old Latin text of the Celtic recension (represented by
nl, or Primate Ussher's MS. at Trinity College, Dublin) there
appears to be close affinity with the Old Latin texts ol Gaul.

Tne Biln'ngnnl M S S .

The Latin side ol the bilingual Codon neno, the fisrh- or sixth-
century MSs presented by Theodore Beza to Cambridge Univer-
sity in 1581, is represented by the symbol d to distinguish it from
D, ol the Greek side, or of the MS. as awhole. Dr. Rendel Harris
and Von Soden consider the intluence of the Latin Version on
the Greek to be characteristic of the text. One leels when read·
ing it that it belongs neither to the African nor to the European
larnily. Kenyon describes it as ‘a Latinislng descendant ol a
Graecising ancestor ¹.²

, Codex Soongnllensis is a bilingual MS. of the Celtic foundation
¹ NAEL„ p. 307. ² nonen, p> 96.

 

