naneatrrceosrans ⁴ 00

by two centuries or more, to the text ol the fourteenth-century
hand. IL Mt xii. 03 to xxviii. 20 contains ,the eleventh-cenrury
stage ol the scholastic text proper, while lat i. 1 to xii. 23 shows
its run growth, under the influence of Peter the Lombard, the
University of Paris, the glossae, and the various correctanea.
Roger Bacon's opinion of the Exemplar Pnrisirrrse is well
known, but he has great respect lor the work 0000 at the Vaticana

The story of how this typically medieval Scholastic text was ’ ’

rerised by the scholars of the Vatican‚ hythe order ancl worlr
of Pope Sixtus; then of the Clementiae Vulgate, with its 32000
corrections3 and or the need for further revision as shown hythe
rnonurnental work of Wordsworth and White on the one hand
and the appointrnent oi the Papal Commission 00 the other¹ is
outside the scope ol this work, where it has been rny endeavour
to show how large and important 0 contribution the Celtic
Gospels haye 01000000 only to the restoration oi St. Jerorne‘s
text oi the Vulgate‚ but also to the Latin text of the Gospels in
general,towards reproducing the sense of the original Greek, upon
which even St. Jerorne has not said the last word, though to hini
the Christian world owes its deepest gratiora}

All lovers of the English Bible with ‘ its simplicity, its dignity,
its power, its happy turns of expression, its general accuracy, and,
we rnust not fail to add, the rnusic of its cadentes, and the
felicities of its rhythrn¹ must not lorget that ‘the translators
appear to have pald much regard to traditional interpretations,
000 especially to the authority of the Vulgare '.³

sunt antem et alia rnulta

qnae fecit iesus
qnae si scribantur per singula
nec ipsum arbitror mundum
capere eos qui scribendi ’
sunt libros anien.

¹ ‘Circa quadragiutnannos 000100000- crediderint stationariisaprincipio'(0prrr
logi infiniti et stationarii Parisios parum Minus, 00. Brewer (opera Irredita),
videntes hocproposuerunterenrplar. Qui p. 333).
trun illiterati inerint et uxorati, non ²‘HeliatheverhoundtheChurchvnto
curantes nec scientes cogitare de veritate him, iu a debt oi special] remembrance
Tertiis Sacri, proposuerunt exemplaria aridthanlrsulnesse’(Tlrr Auraortsed Ver-
vitiosissima et scriptores infiniti addi- rirrroftle Bible. Tae Trenslarorsto
derunt ad corruptionem multas rnnta- rreaeader). ’
tiones. Deinde novi theologi 000 habne- ³ aenars' Frefhce, 1880.
runt posse examinandi exemplaria, er

 

