xii INTRODUCTION v

As the tale is told, it was at lichni, or Flatholme, that Gildas
’ copied the sour Gospels, for the ‘Life¹ proceeds to state:

‘When blessed Gildas lived in the isle of Echni, and performed
the ministerial duties‚ he wrote a missal book (missalem librum scri-
psitland offered it to St. Cadoc when he became his confessor: there-

fore that book was called the Gospel of Gildas (ideoque codex 1110
evangelium Gildac vocaturi*

The traditions 01 lreland, Wales, and Brittany connect Gildas
with the writing of such MSS. as ours.

The Irish saint Brendan is said to have visited Gildas at Ruys
ln Brittany and to have found there a ‘missal‘ used by Gildas
himself and written in Greek characters:

‘Et habebat S. Gylldas missalem librum scriptum Graecis litteris,
et positus est ille liber snper altare.⁵

lrish scholars have shown how ‘ booh’ and ‘missal ’ were inter-
· changeable terms at that period.2 The Llandaff Gospels answer
the description in all respects but one. Caradoc says it was at
Llancarfan 10 his time, which was after the Llandaff book had
reached its new home at Lichfield, but I know 01 00 reason why

it should not have been another copy 01 the Gospels written by
St. Gildas himself.

We have already seen on page xi the ‘ Ostenditur' entry, and
must now consider what is known as the ‘Surenit ¹ entry‚ which
contains the oldest piece of continuous Welsh prose 10 the world.
There has been some difference of opinion amongst experts as to
which was entered first on the last page of St. illlatthew's Gospel.
Sir'John llforris lones, Professor Lindsay, and the Dean 01

Lichfield (Dr. Savage) maintain that ‘ Surexit ' vves entered where
it now is before the ‘Ostenditur' entry was made at the top 01
the page³ The style of the letter-ing certainly seems to be older
than that 01 ‘Ostenditur’3 moreover the attestations to the
‘ Ostenditur' are decidedly scanty—just two of them—and incom-
plete, as the dots 10 the gaps seem to show. The ‘Ostenditur'
appears to beai· the marks of having been copied from another

¹ 11005, eerraira-Bactra Soiutsppdd, “missalis liber¹' and “euangelium Gil-
360. dae '¹ in the same sentence ol the Life of
1 ‘The volume known as“The Gospel St. 0000061005,1100016001110-3011111
⁴ of St. Martio of Tours’' is called in the Salute, p.66)’ (Dr. Lawlor in R.I.A.{l .
story of its invention by st. Columba, a xxxiii. C, p. 327).
“liber missalis” (Reeves, p. 325). A Β800 Tallesv'n in the Cymruvodov,
book written by St, Gildas is called both vol. xxviii (1918), pp. zet-79.

 

