THE CELTIC GOSPELS ι 'xliii

which the colophon was written, and from which it was copied
into the new book, but no satisfactory answer has been given to
the statement that it was 'written in twelve days, although Dr.
Lawlor says: ‘l have satisfied myself by actual trial that the
text ol the Gospels could be copied iu a modern hand, with
sufficient care to ensure that every letter could be easily read by
a person unacquainted with the Latin langnage, in 112 houm, ,
that is, in twelvc days ol rather more than ninehoursst Iwonder
whether this experiment was made with a strange llllS. and a
strange text, with no standardized orthography‚ with such mate·
rials as St. Columba would have used, and under such conditions
as he would have worked?

Ι have myself transcribed the Latin text os St. Matthew from ¹
Tello = Chad five times, St. Mark four times, St. Luke from the
Hereiord Gospels, and again St. Matthew irorn the twelfth-
century text os the Book of Llandaff, and 1 cannot believe that
St Columba could have copied the tour Gospels in twelve days.
lllloreover, what he transcribed is described in the singular and
by a diminutive, an euangelium and a libellus.

The familiar Celtic portiaits of the evangelista each of thern ,
holding abook, show that the Gospels were regarded as four
books, each of which ovas an ‘euangelium '. St. Patrick is repre· ⁴
sented as giving ‘libri aeuangelii ‘‚ while both he and St. Bride are
spoken ol as ‘sowing the four books ol the Gospel ¹. Even as
late as the twellth century, the Book oi Llandafs, known to the

Chapter as ‘Textus' in later times, contains St. Matthew alone. Ἴ

There was atime in Ireland when each of the Gospels was provided
with a separate shrine or cnmdach and it must be remembered
that the ancient lrish did not practise the artos bookbinding.
Several examples are known ol single Gospels copied apart, and
this was'especially so with theGosp'el of St. John. Moreover,
, the word, used iu the colophon is ‘libellus ’,a diminutive, which
in the Colmar MS. (Stadtbibi. 38) is used fora single Gospel,
though it sorms part of a volume containing all four.

Il my theory be correct that the transcription said to have
been executed in twelve days relers to a particular book ol the
Gospels and not to the four, the colophon attached to the capi-
tula owat. John gave the name of Columba to the whole. The

same thing happened in the case of the Book ol Mulling. The ,

 

fourth Gospel os the Book ol hlulling was actually written by· .

