INTRODUCTION

Tire Rise os tlre scholaste Text.

For some centuries aiter Aleum, the development of the text
proceeded on different principles—the desire to revise the
readings so as to accord with the texts of the FatherS, the
supreme and authoritative interpretem of Holy Wrir, in whose
writings the spiritual and mystic sense was to be found which
alone could give life to the bare letter of the lew, or rather of the
mandata Christe· which they called the Gospels.

As some oi the Fathers had passed away before St. Jerome
had corrected the Old Vulgate and produced the New, their quo-
tations would naturally bc from the Old Latin. St. Augustine's
text in his earlier worhs shows the Old, and in his later writings
the New Vulgate. St. Gregory, as we have seen, used both.
So the readings of the ‘Sancti' (Patres understood) would be
largely from pre-Jeromian sources, and their introduction into
a text supposed to be that of St. Jerome would corrupt its
purity. This was clearly seen by Roget Bacon :—

‘Translatio est Hieronymi, quam nos tenemus . .. . ntideo curn
sancti recitantverhaScripturae secundum illam translationem, putant
quia una et eadem est, quam allegant saneti et quae debet esse nunc

inBiblia Latinorum. Quod nou est verum. Et ideo corrigunt et
corrumpunt textum per hanc viam.’¹

Meanwhile the Celtic settlements on the Continent produced
scholars who from their stores oi patristic learning contributed
other non-hieronymis elements to the Jeromian text on princi-
ples which Dr. Glunz has so ably deduced from their writings.²

¹Oprrr nrimu, ecl. Erewer (Opera iriseh sind und demit die Anpussnng an
inedita), p. 374. die irisehen Bedttrinisseschon vorgenorn-
² ‘Wie sich aber ein eigentiimlicher menist¹ (B.B., p. 83).
Texttypus in der britisehen Kirehe ither- ‘Die zahlreichensrenen, die nach dem
haupt entwicheln honnte, erhl'a'rt sieh griechischenhorrigiert oder neu tibersetrt
durch die Sondereutwiclrlung, die die an· sein musseu, suiten anf und zeugen von
tihe und trasstseh-patrisrische Gelehr- der Gelehrsamlreit irischer Sthreiber-
samkeit und literarisehe Bet‘a'tignng in monche’ (B. B„ p. 84).
irland genornmen hatten’ (B. 8., p. 7 ). ‘Die individuellen Bestrebuugen ein·
‘Niehthieronynrianisehe Lesartensiud zelner seltener, die bald mehr darn
in erster Liuie altluteinischen Einfltrssen sergestesarren aus altlateinisehen und
zuzuschreiben. Dnrin iiussert sich die griechischen Codices eiuzuitthren, hald
gelehrte, testvergleiehende Haltung iri- mehr darn, den Tertahzuiindern in der
soher Miiuche. Sie gehen auf iiltere Absicht, ihu zu interpretieren' (M,
Codices zurtteh, weil sie dort einen hes· p. 87).
seren Text termulen, aber such weil die ‘So wlrd dns Teutwort nieht einiaeh

Lesarten dieses Testes sehon spezifisch kopiert, sourlem hinfig n'urinterpretiert‚

 

