xv ,, INTRODUCTION

there and at Merthyr llllawr, and no one has said that these were
‘written in lreland’. What is true of the script is also true of
the Celtic interiaced work both oi the MSS. and the monu-
ments ,
Tlte Gospets at lerdoff.

The Dean of Lichfreld has shown more fully than can he
attempted here how this Gospeiboolt stood in relation to the
altar iu the Celtic Church as did the testimony in relation to th
ael< amongst the Jews.

‘Atrd thou shalt put into the ari< the testimony witichi s

thee!x

So the new testimony, that of the Gospels of the hlew Testa
ment, became the accessory of the altar, regarded as the mercy
seat in the Celtic Chnrch.

tte Book of Life.

Here and there throughout the ms. are names by themselves
with nothing but a cross before them. The twelfth-centnry
3001< Of Llandaff, containing copies ot documents of previous

ages, shows ns how this feature arose. It was because this ³
Gospel-hook was regarded as a Book of Life, a figure so to
speair of the ‘Eoolc of Life' mentioned in Rev. iii. 5, xiii. 8, xx,
12, 15, xxi. 27, with special reference to those ‘whose names are
intheboolzol liie' (Philiv. 3). Foraconsideration,persons¹names
werewritten in the Llandaff liber attae, that is in the Gospels
which adorned the altar.
‘Ilias for his soul, and the inscription of his name in the Book of
Life, gave a mansion in the middle of Abcrgsvenny and four modii of'

land with ie’2
‘Erbig son of sinn, for inscrihing his nante in the Boot oi Life,

granted in alnis to St. Dubdcius, St. Teilo . . ‚¹³

The book was also kept as the most precious relic which the
, church possessed.4 lt is doubtful whether it was ever meant

¹ Ex. miv. td. olergy, confirmed their peace‚both swear-

² Rees, L.L., p 436. ing npoh the altar of Peter the Aponio,

³ ltin, p. 450. ond of St. Dnbricfus, St, Teilo, sud St.

⁴ ‘During the reign of Meurig, son ot Oudooeus, theholy Gospelsand the relies
ithaci, King of Glewyssig‚ Ili, son of of the saints being placed before them,
Connus, aud Camawg met together at that their socient eumity was done surray
the monastery of Llaudafi, and iu the andforgotten? (ltin, p. adp.)
presence of Bishop Cerenhir, and his

 

