THE CELTIC GOSPELS xlvii

lee Gaaland as Howtla.

This, to give the MS. its homely name, or deseramus II, repre-
sented by the symbol ag, with the exception of the Hereiord
Gospels, hasatext more like that oi Teilo=Chad than any other
that has survived, as it contains a large Old Latin elementanda Ἴ
great nurnber of purely Insulas readings. M. Berger says with
much truth: ‘This MS. is not the first, and it will nothe the last .
irish MS. which will cause us to turn our eyes towards Spain!
Its unique importance has been shown by Mr. Hoskier in his
book Coracerniag the ¹Genesis os tlte Versibus (Quaritch, 1910),
and the same scholar has since published the whole text (1919). ι
This MS. is another treasure oi Trmity College, Dublin.

Some scholars have been particularly unfortunate in their
treatment atthis MS. Dr. Scriuener in his introduction to Codex
S. ceaddae (p. xiv), while complaining oi the carelessness ot'
the scribe, has assigned the well-known colophonoi the Book
of Durrow to this MS. He says:

‘The other document, now first collated by Dr. Abbott (above,
p. wi, note 1) and by him named &serianus alter, also a semi-uncial
is among Primate Ussher’s books, apparently unclassed. It is later
than its feton, perhaps written in tire ninth century. A subscription
declares that it tuas the work of Columbae scripturas (certainly not the
great saint, who died ho. 597) and that he wrote it prr xii dz'erram
spartam, which is possible enough since it is suu oi errors oi all kinds!

Beforel had ever heard oi Mr. Hoskier and his work I had
formed an optuion of the inadequate character oi Dr. Abbott's
collatioris as recorded in his Euarrgela'ormn Versa Anraatera-
rwarriana, and was confirmed in this opinion on reading the
portiom os texts supplied by tar-‘tauto in his Book of
rualltag.

Now that Mr. Hoskiet has given us a lull transcript oi the

text oi ap, we are in a position to test the truth oi his indict-
ment:

‘My estimate of Dr. Abbott’s work (in his appendix to Codex r)
erred on the side oi leniency, ior it will be found that he is guilty ot
, the neglect oi scaea hrrrzdrad readings, anti misprints about three hun-
dred more, making together aare taozasaud errors oi omission and

conrmission. . . . Over two thousand varieties of spelling in the MS. ,

do not hnd aplace in his collation¹

 

