THF CELTIC GOSPELS lxi

priests to leam (or to teach) to read the Holy Scriptores without
payment or gift and avoid controversies.l

The demand lor the study of Holy Scripture in the Episcopal
Schools would necessitate greater uniformity in the text. This
tras clearly seen by Charlemagne who invited the Anglo-Saxoh
scholar Alcuin to his realrn ior the purpose of undertaking the
task. dicuin, when he was educated in the school of Yorlc, had
been nurtured in the uadtuons os the Venerable Bere, the fore-
most scholar olbis race. As ‘ Minister ot Education ’, with the
object os producing one text sor the whole realrn, he invited
dogio-Saron and Celtic scholars to his schools, and secured ,
texts current in his natiue Northurnbria, consisting chiefly of the
lt-t( and the x-0 types. The Codex Arruntium or A, as it is
called, has been described by ΜΓ. Plater and Dr. illihite2 as ‘the
monarch among Latin MSS, whose history reads like a romance'.
lt contains a text which is nearer to St. Jerome's revision ol the
Old Latin than any other, and was written either at Wearmouth
or at Jarrow hy order of Ceolfrid (St. Bede’s abbot) and sent as
a gift to the Pope at Rome in aa). 715. lt takes its name from
the fact that it was afterwards placed in the Library of Monte
Amiata. Something has been said already³ about its text
brought from Italy by the Anglo-Saxon scholars of Northumbria
who were striving to bring to their people the culture of the Holy
Roman Church.

The Book ol Lindisfarne, or Ἡ also presents the best type of
St. Jeromc¹s Vulgate, of which A is the pre-eminent example,
But while the hand ol A is Italian, that oi Y is Celtic. trs text,
however, is irorn Naples, copied, as Professor Turner thought
from the Durham Gospels, of which a fragment remains in a
beautiful Roman hand, which he has edited in his Vulgata caspar
with an excellent iacsimile. ln some strange readings of Teilo=
Chad there is support lrorn Y, probably on account oi its having

been produced in a scriptorium which bada Celtic foundation.
These two great MSS. of the Northumbrian school represent

one type oi the best text of the Church of the English, now

young in the saith, but there was another type which carne with

¹ ‘Ocri Cristto3o . , . y flwyddyn bonno llain yr Ysgrythyr lan heb dal heb geri, ac
y peris Ioseb Escob Teilaw ua wuelid ua ua wnetyntacymrysonau? C.E.D.‚i, 291.
eunitae gorchwyl ar y Sulieu a'r gwyl- ² Gronunor estha ttrrtgare, p. 136.
itt, ag a rvnaeth i'1 offeiriaid ddysgu dar· ³ p. xiv, 4 p. xiii.

 

