'tiemo

PREFACE

PREFACE has comete mean one of two things, hut some·

tirnes a combination of both: first the giving ol a reason for
the productiori of the book, and next, the author's expression
ol thanks to those who have helped him in his work. Nothing
need be said of the former because it is already set forth in the
Introduction.

I can say of the photostat facsirnile of the Book os St. Cleri,
which is known to my friends as ‘Teilo ', what Bianchini said of
codex Veronensis after he had that manuscript at his own house
as his constant companion: ‘semper dorni socium et 'tamquam
contubernalem habui’ (aL. B. Τ. No, vi, p. vii). For this
privilege I have to thank my colleagues the Dean and Chapter
' of Llandaff, not forgetting the Very Rev. Garfield Willintns,
Dean of Manchester, but at the inception of this work rny Dean
and friend at Llandaff.

The appreciation of so great a scholar as Dr. Savage Dean
of Lichfield, has been such an inspiration in this periculosa prae-
sumptio as to make ine persevere in a task which a textual critic
has described as being 50 irksorne that it is generally shirked
(Hoskierz concontrigtne Genesis'efthe Versinnswol. 1, pp. x, xi).
However, it has been to rne a pius leber. The Dean, who, with
the tnodesty of the erudite, has described himself as ‘a disciple
of accurac'y ', said in his ‘ Story of St. Chad’s Gospels' (31111111ιὲ-
tave Archaeological society's transientes, vol. xli, pp. 5-21):
‘For the main purpose of this paper is to trace the life-story oi
this manuscript rather than its textual peculiarities. A critical
study oi the text would involve a long and detailed examination'
, It is the result oi this ‘long and detailed examination' extend-
ing over three years, which I venture to set forth with the feeling
that 1 have the critical eyes of Masters 01 the Schools, like
Dr. Savage‚ upon the work, and in the hopethat they will nothe
severe when they consider the conditions under which it had to
hedone.

A vicar of a parish 01 20000 people cannot afford rnuch tirne for
work in public libraries: what literary work he can do should be
done at horne where he is always ‘at call' 101 his parochia] duties

 

