THE CELTIC GOSPELS xxix

the oldest and best Greek readings and amended the current
’ renderings nearest to them in such a way as to bring them
closer to the best Greek texts. He checked glosses and interpo-
lations, and kept as near to the orthography of the Greek, in
words derived from Greek, as the Latin language would allow.
When St. Augustine wrote to congratulare him as a translator
he disclaimed the term and substituted the word corrector ‘si me,
ut dicis, in N.T. emendatione suscipis'. He used an Old Latin
text that had probably had previous revision. Souter is of
opinion that it was such a MS. as b, but in St. Luke a text
almost identical with u.

Tae Receptr'ou of thr Vulgata

We know that somewherebetween 394 and 400, to quote
Professor Burkitt's words, ‘something happened at Hippo' in
the matter os the text which St. Augustine used. ln short quo-
tations from memory he quotes from the Old Latin, but for
longer and continuous passages he goes to St. jerome's revised
version. No doubt the larger and more important chnrches also
used St. Jerorne's version, though not to the total exclusion ol the
Old Latin texts, which continued to be copied in many places.
Though St. Jerome's work was undertaken at the request of
the Pope it had to win its way by its own merits, and was not
received with universal approbation. New copies would be made
for some large churches, and srom smaller chnrches copies of
the Old Latin text would be brought in to be corrected. Skins
were expensive, and it was more convenient in every way to
bring the present copy of the Gospels possessed by a church
up to date by correcting it with the new version than to have
. anewcopymade.

A church would not be compelled to use the new Vulgate; in
fact at Rome itself, according to Gregory the Great‚ St. Jerome’s
Version was used side by side with the Old Latin, while the
quotations in St. Gregory’s homilies are from a mixed type of
text. A scribe would therefore feel that he was not bound to
incorporate into his text every correction that St. Jerome had Ἴ
made. For instance, when he came to the petition lor our
daily bread in the Paternoster he may not have liked the new
rendering ‘supersubstantialem’ and would still keep to his old
‘cotidianum'. Or· again he might have found Jerome¹s new

 

