xlvi INTRODUCTION

with Dr. Abbott’s collation we find he does not say that ‘ antern'
is omitted aiter ‘postquam ’. He omits ‘misserunt' for ‘mise-
runt ¹, ‘inpossuerunt' ior ‘inposuerunt and ‘iudeorum’ sor
Ι ‘ludaeorumt The earne work contains also an illustration of
Mt. xxvii. 38-43. Here again we find that he omits ‘discendo'
ior ³ descende ', and ‘discendat' for ‘descendat ’. ⁴
The little book called Exavnples ofCeltr‘c ornaments svam
tire Bootes of K ells ared Drrrrocv has a reproduetion of the Kells
MS. with the text of Mc. xv. 26-31. Here Dr. Abbot omits
‘iudeorum' ior ‘Iudaeorum’, ‘duos’ for ‘duo’‚ ‘senistris’ for
‘sinistris ¹, ‘ad inpleta' ior *adimpleta ¹, ‘discendens' for ‘des-
cendens'.

vre'soorofvrwrng.

This is also preserved at Trinity College, Dubiin, and is more
recent than we should suppose from its colophon. Its script -
resembles that of the Book oi Armagh, and its text is very
. like that of cp, Teilo=Chad, and Hereiord. tt. Berger quotes

from it some Interest'ing readings as far as Latin MSS. are con-
cerned, such as the words of Jesus to Martha in Le. x. 42:
‘Paucis vero opus est vel etiarn rrno'. Dr. Lawlor's work on >this
MS. is ot great use as showing how rnuch oi the Old Latin text
was corrected to accord with the Vulgare, and how it was done.
Besides the Old Latin chapters which he has given us, we have
also Mr.·Hoslrier’s collation of those parts os St'Lulre where the

= ‚text is not given by Dr. Lawlor. its symbol ispor moll.

T lte Book of thmn.

This is also ot Trinity College‚ Dubhn, and the name oi
Dimma is said to have been substituted for that of the real scribe
oi these Gospels much later, in order to pass the MS. offas the
very Gospel-book which wasvsupposed to have been written
miraculously in forty days by one Dimma, as recorded in the
Liie oi St. Cronan. All thot I know of the text is from Hoshier's‘
collation of it in St. Matthew.

The script of Armagh liolling, ancl Dimma is not the fine

semi-uncial of Teilo=Chad botos a corsive character abounding
in contractions¹

 

